Dams and water diversions are a major threat to freshwater fishes, but improved management of flows in highly modified systems can benefit native species. There is an urgent need for improved understanding of spatiotemporal dynamics of fish assemblages to inform conservation and management. Environmental DNA (eDNA) metabarcoding is a sensitive and non-invasive method for characterizing biodiversity, providing critical insight into ecological communities and potentially assembly dynamics. This study applied eDNA metabarcoding to (1) elucidate spatiotemporal trends in fish assemblages along the longitudinal profile of a stream where flows are managed to benefit native anadromous fishes, (2) compare eDNA results with long-term standardized conventional monitoring methods (electrofishing and traps), and (3) assess how eDNA might be used to inform stream management. eDNA samples (n=58) were collected from 12 sites over ~2 years. Taxonomy was assigned to species level using a curated regional reference sequence database. Twenty-seven fish species from 12 families were detected, including 9 native fishes. Community assemblages differed between study sites along the longitudinal gradient of the stream and by season (fall and spring). Shannon diversity indices were higher at downstream sites and in fall, reflecting increased richness of warmwater non-native species. In comparative analysis with conventional monitoring, eDNA detected more species. Modified rank-abundance curves using eDNA data revealed that while curve shape (evenness) was similar among sites, species shifted widely among ranks over space. Therefore, reordering processes appeared to be a key factor driving spatiotemporal assembly differences. Stream rehabilitation efforts have been highly successful in promoting a shift in fish assemblages via reordering in upper stream reaches, but these same changes have not occurred lower in the watershed. High sensitivity and potential taxonomic biases should be considered when interpreting eDNA metabarcoding data. Overall, eDNA can be powerful tool for understanding community assembly dynamics in streams, including responses to stream rehabilitation and ecosystem management.
